feat(replay): Mobile Replay performance overhead (#11989)
getsentry/sentry-docs: docs/product/explore/session-replay/mobile/performance-overhead.mdx

---
title: "Replay Performance Overhead"
sidebar_order: 30
description: "Learn more about how enabling Session Replay impacts the performance of your application."
---

Session Replay for mobile works by taking snapshots of the view hierarchy as well as a screenshot within the same frame, at the rate of one per second. These screenshots are then compressed into a video file representing a segment of the user’s session. All these small segments are then streamed into Sentry with additional trace identifiers, breadcrumbs, and other useful debugging information to compose the full user session.

> In order to perform this work without negatively impacting the host application's performance, the mobile SDKs take care to introduce minimal additional CPU and memory overhead, record screenshots and view hierarchy in a non-intrusive way and only when necessary, send the absolute minimum number of bytes required, and use low-latency ingestion endpoints geographically close to your end-users.

Reviewer: "mobile SDKs take care" in this context sounds a little odd. how about "Sentry employs a number of measures to minimize additional CPU and memory overhead, such as...."

**For most mobile applications, the performance overhead of our mobile SDKs will be imperceptible to end-users.**

## How Is Session Replay Optimized?

> Sentry's Session Replay SDK takes several measures to avoid negatively impacting the performance of the screen on which it's running:

Reviewer: We say "Mobile SDKs" above... which makes more sense, "Mobile SDK" or "Session Replay SDK"?

We should try to be consistent.

Also is there a reason why we specify "screen" instead of "of your application"?

Author: I think Session Replay SDK makes more sense. As in, "the session replay part of the mobile sdk"

- The Session Replay SDK works by capturing screenshots, encoding them into small video segments and transmitting the content to Sentry’s servers. To reduce the amount of data transferred, multiple optimization strategies are employed:

>   - The SDK captures at most one screenshot per second at a 1:1 pixel density (commonly referred to as `@1x` on iOS and `mdpi` on Android). This significantly speeds up the screenshot screenshot capture process while maintaining acceptable quality.

Reviewer: 'acceptable quality', should we specify acceptable video quality? assuming that's what we're referencing

>   - The SDK captures at most one screenshot per second at a 1:1 pixel density (commonly referred to as `@1x` on iOS and `mdpi` on Android). This significantly speeds up the screenshot screenshot capture process while maintaining acceptable quality.

Author: yeah video or replay either would be fine here I guess 👍

>   - Screenshots are compressed into lossy `jpeg` files to reduce disk space usage and enable replay recovery in the event of a crash or an ANR.

Reviewer: what do we mean by 'replay recovery', its not clear to me?

Author: recovering last segment/frames of a replay in case a crash happened. Not sure how to phrase this better

>   - When sending a replay segment, the screenshots are further compressed into an `mp4` video file using `h.264` compression with a 75 kbps bitrate (the default behavior). This ensures a small payload size while preserving a perceivable replay quality. We observed nearly a 5x reduction in size when compressing five screenshots into a video segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - When sending a replay segment, the screenshots are further compressed into an `mp4` video file using `h.264` compression with a 75 kbps bitrate (the default behavior). This ensures a small payload size while preserving  replay quality. We observed nearly a 5x reduction in size when compressing five screenshots into a video segment.
```
```suggestion
  - When sending a replay segment, the screenshots are further compressed into an `mp4` video file using `h.264` compression with a 75 kbps bitrate (the default behavior). This ensures a small payload size while preservingthe replay video quality. We observed nearly a 5x reduction in size when compressing five screenshots into a video segment.
```

>   - When sending a replay segment, the screenshots are further compressed into an `mp4` video file using `h.264` compression with a 75 kbps bitrate (the default behavior). This ensures a small payload size while preserving the replay video quality. We observed nearly a 5x reduction in size when compressing five screenshots into a video segment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - When sending a replay segment, the screenshots are further compressed into an `mp4` video file using `h.264` compression with a 75 kbps bitrate (the default behavior). This ensures a small payload size while preserving video quality. We observed nearly 5x reduction in size when compressing five screenshots into a video segment.
```

>   - The video segment, alogn with other debugging information (such as breadcrumbs) is gzip-compressed on the client before transmission over HTTP. This compression is performed on a background thread, ensuring the application's main thread remains unaffected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The video segment, along with other debugging information (such as breadcrumbs), is gzip-compressed on the client before transmission over HTTP. This compression is performed on a background thread, ensuring the application's main thread remains unaffected.
```

  - To minimize disk space usage, screenshots and video segment files are deleted from the disk upon successful upload.

> - Sentry’s event ingestion infrastructure uses [distributed Points-of-Presence (PoPs)](https://blog.sentry.io/2022/03/31/sentry-points-of-presence-how-we-built-a-distributed-ingestion/) which place ingestion servers around the world and close to your users. When a Session Replay event is transmitted, the user’s device connects and transmits the event payload to the closest PoP available for their region. This greatly reduces end-to-end latency and minimizes the amount of networking overhead placed on the browser.

Author: ```suggestion
- Sentry’s event ingestion infrastructure uses [distributed Points-of-Presence (PoPs)](https://blog.sentry.io/2022/03/31/sentry-points-of-presence-how-we-built-a-distributed-ingestion/) which place ingestion servers around the world and close to your users. When a Session Replay event is transmitted, the user’s device connects and transmits the event payload to the closest PoP available for their region. This greatly reduces end-to-end latency and minimizes the amount of networking overhead placed on the device.
```

> - Sentry’s event ingestion infrastructure uses [distributed Points-of-Presence (PoPs)](https://blog.sentry.io/2022/03/31/sentry-points-of-presence-how-we-built-a-distributed-ingestion/) which place ingestion servers around the world and close to your users. When a Session Replay event is transmitted, the user’s device connects and transmits the event payload to the closest PoP available for their region. This greatly reduces end-to-end latency and minimizes the amount of networking overhead placed on the browser.

Reviewer: "minimizes the amount of networking overhead placed on the browser." does browser make sense in the context of mobile?

Author: nope, just a copy-pasta from the web docs 🙈

Reviewer: LOL

> - The SDK is built to gracefully downgrade when needed. In the event of sending too many replay events and hitting Sentry's rate limit, the SDK will disable recording to make sure the rate limit is respected. Once the rate limit is lifted, the SDK will continue recording.

Reviewer: can we specify the rate limit? this comes up a lot

Author: I don't think we can specify it as it depends on the project/org replay quota

## Factors in Performance Overhead

> While the performance overhead of our mobile replay SDKs will be imperceptible to end-users most of the time, it can vary based on the complexity of your application. If an application has screens with a deeply-nested view tree, there will be higher overhead compared to simpler (e.g. Settings) screens.

Reviewer: we capitalize "Mobile Replay SDKs" above, we should try to be consistent w/ the formatting

> While the performance overhead of our mobile replay SDKs will be imperceptible to end-users most of the time, it can vary based on the complexity of your application. If an application has screens with a deeply-nested view tree, there will be higher overhead compared to simpler (e.g. Settings) screens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the performance overhead of our mobile replay SDKs will be imperceptible to end-users most of the time, it can vary based on the complexity of your application. If an application has screens with a deeply-nested view tree, there will be higher overhead compared to simpler (e.g., Settings) screens.
```

> 
> While the performance overhead of our Session Replay SDK will be imperceptible to end-users most of the time, it can vary based on the complexity of your application. If an application has screens with a deeply-nested view tree, there will be higher overhead compared to simpler (e.g., Settings) screens.
> 
> If masking is enabled (the default behavior), network overhead is further reduced because the screenshots have fewer pixels, resulting in smaller file sizes.
> 
> There are different stages in the lifecycle of a mobile application, each with different performance characteristics. Here is a list of stages in the lifecycle, and the most important performance metrics to be aware of.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

While the performance overhead of our Session Replay SDK will be imperceptible to end-users most of the time, it can vary based on the complexity of your application. If an application has screens with a deeply-nested view tree, there will be higher overhead compared to simpler screens (for example, Settings).

If the default masking behavior is enabled, network overhead will be further reduced because the screenshots have fewer pixels, resulting in smaller file sizes.

There are different stages in the lifecycle of a mobile application. Each has different performance characteristics. Below is a list of lifecycle stages and the most important performance metrics you should be aware of.
```

### App Start

> There is virtually no overhead from the SDK during application startup. It performs only a few lightweight tasks, such as registering the necessary listeners for system events and scheduling a background thread for capturing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is virtually no overhead from the SDK during application start up. It performs only a few lightweight tasks, such as registering the necessary listeners for system events and scheduling a background thread for capturing.
```

### Main Thread

> The SDK performs only the bare minimum on the main thread to capture a new frame for the replay (a screenshot and a view hierarchy snapshot) before immediately switching to a background thread for post-processing tasks. These tasks include masking screenshots, storing them in the disk cache, or encoding a video segment. This process occurs at most once per secondk, and it can be even less frequent depending on the frame rate setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SDK performs only the bare minimum on the main thread to capture a new frame for the replay (a screenshot and a view hierarchy snapshot) before immediately switching to a background thread for post-processing tasks. These tasks include masking screenshots, storing them in the disk cache, or encoding a video segment. This process occurs at most once per second, and it can be even less frequent depending on the frame rate setting.
```

Reviewer: is this frame rate setting configurable? worth mentioning if it is and links to learn how you can configure it

Author: it's configurable but only internally for now, we may expose it in the future if there's a request

> The SDK also monitors view tree changes, and if no changes have occurred since the last frame capture, it reuses the previously captured data, completely avoiding any work on the main thread.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SDK also monitors view tree changes. If no changes have occurred since the last frame capture, it reuses the previously captured data, completely avoiding any work on the main thread.
```

> ### Capturing touch events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Capturing Touch Events
```

> - Click/touch, swipe and scroll events are incredibly small and fast to log; overhead is negligible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Click/touch, swipe, and scroll events are incredibly small and fast to log; overhead is negligible.
```

> 
> - Click/touch, swipe, and scroll events are incredibly small and fast to log; overhead is negligible.
> - We debounce touch events and use smoothing for move events to balance the detail you see while debugging, with the amount of redundant data captured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Click/touch, swipe, and scroll events are incredibly small and fast to log, making the overhead negligible.
- We optimize touch event recording by debouncing (limiting the frequency of events) and smoothing move events. This ensures a clear, detailed debugging experience without capturing excessive or redundant data.
```

## Measuring Performance Overhead

> The only way to get accurate metrics is to measure performance overhead yourself. You can apply realistic access patterns against your own application, and correlate that to your own topline business metrics.

Reviewer: "and correlate that to your own topline business metrics."

what do you mean by this? 🤔

> We measured the overhead of the Replay SDK on various open-source apps that have millions of users in production (i.e. real-world apps that have a big set of different components and features), such as [Bluesky](https://github.com/bluesky-social/social-app) or [Pocket Casts](https://github.com/Automattic/pocket-casts-android). You can check the results on the respective SDK's docs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We measured the overhead of the Replay SDK on various open-source apps that have millions of users in production (i.e., real-world apps that have a big set of different components and features), such as [Bluesky](https://github.com/bluesky-social/social-app) or [Pocket Casts](https://github.com/Automattic/pocket-casts-android). You can check the results on the respective SDK's docs:
```

> We measured the overhead of the Replay SDK on various open-source apps that have millions of users in production (i.e. real-world apps that have a big set of different components and features), such as [Bluesky](https://github.com/bluesky-social/social-app) or [Pocket Casts](https://github.com/Automattic/pocket-casts-android). You can check the results on the respective SDK's docs:

Reviewer: Why do we mention Bluesky when both iOS and Android examples are Pocket Casts based? Am I missing something? 👁️

Author: yeah we used it for benchmarking as well, but here it's just an example as we don't provide those numbers anywhere. Can remove it, but also don't think it hurts

> We measured the overhead of the Replay SDK on various open-source apps that have millions of users in production (i.e., real-world apps that have a big set of different components and features), such as [Bluesky](https://github.com/bluesky-social/social-app) or [Pocket Casts](https://github.com/Automattic/pocket-casts-android). You can check the results on the respective SDK's docs:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We measured the overhead of the Replay SDK on various open-source apps that have millions of users in production. For example, real-world apps that have a large set of different components and features such as [Bluesky](https://github.com/bluesky-social/social-app) and [Pocket Casts](https://github.com/Automattic/pocket-casts-android). You can check the results by going to the SDK docs below:
```
